---
date: "2019-10-27T00:00:00Z"
external_link: ""
image:
  caption:  
  focal_point: Smart
links:
- icon: twitter
  icon_pack: fab
  name: Follow
  url:  https://twitter.com/lexidecker3?lang=en
slides:  
summary: The virtues and perversions of attention

tags:
- Attentional states
title: Why loosening the grip on attention can help you learn more
url_code: ""
url_pdf: ""
url_slides: ""
url_video: ""
---


We all want mastery over our mental capacities. To push our limits and attend for longer when our mind wants to wander.


At the end of a long day, the battle to pay attention can feel like a battle between slave and slave driver.

In the movie Limitless, a struggling writer tries to win this battle against the limit on his own mental capacities by taking a drug that enhances his attention. He rises to the top of his game and has opportunities to make loads of money. He can now encode new knowledge and retrieve information at an unprecedented rate.

Like in the movie Limitless, we show that heightened attention augments our mental capacities, allowing us to encode and retrieve information easily. You can read our paper here: As attention waxes and wanes across time, so too does our ability to learn from our experiences. Based on our findings, people with better sustained attention capacities should learn and retrieve information faster than those who can’t. 

But is this always the case? Are people who overcome their attentional limits better learners?

Counterintuitively, the answer is no.

In fact, memory consolidation, reinforcing our memories for long-term storage, takes place during rest and sleep when arousal and attention are operating at low levels. So without periods of rest, it would be difficult to consolidate our memories. You can read more about how memory works during different vigilant and relaxed attentional states by reading our paper here:

Second, some types of learning operate better when we’re not concentrating so damn hard. In fact, detaching our attention from the most important information allows our eyes and minds to drift where they will, where we may notice patterns that go unnoticed by others who only pay attention to what’s most relevant to a task at hand.

We recently showed that fluctuations in attention increase our sensitivity to patterns that aren’t explicitly obvious. We can then use these patterns to our benefit. Therefore, while heightened attentional states allow us readily to attend to and encode what seems important at the moment, maintaining this state forever might hurt us in the long run. Just like the struggling writer finds in the movie Limitless. 

So don’t fret when your mind wanders. If you let it, you might end up learning something important.